# Simulate a vector of transmission chains statistics (sizes/lengths)

It generates a vector of transmission chain sizes or lengths using the
same model as
[`simulate_chains()`](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epichains/dev/reference/simulate_chains.md)
but without tracking details of the individual chains. This function is
useful when only the chain sizes or lengths are of interest.

It uses a simple branching process model that simulates independent
chains, using an offspring distribution for each chain. Each chain uses
a threshold chain size or length as the stopping criterion especially
where R0 \> 1. The function also optionally accepts population related
inputs such as the population size (defaults to Inf) and percentage of
the population initially immune (defaults to 0).

## Usage

``` r
simulate_chain_stats(
  n_chains,
  statistic = c("size", "length"),
  offspring_dist,
  ...,
  stat_threshold = Inf,
  pop = Inf,
  percent_immune = 0
)
```

## Arguments

- n_chains:

  Number of chains to simulate.

- statistic:

  The chain statistic to track as the stopping criteria for each chain
  being simulated when `stat_threshold` is not `Inf`; A `<string>`. It
  can be one of:

  - "size": the total number of cases produced by a chain before it goes
    extinct.

  - "length": the total number of generations reached by a chain before
    it goes extinct.

- offspring_dist:

  Offspring distribution: a `<function>` like the ones provided by R to
  generate random numbers from given distributions (e.g.,
  [`rpois`](https://rdrr.io/r/stats/Poisson.html) for Poisson). More
  specifically, the function needs to accept at least one argument, `n`,
  which is the number of random numbers to generate. It can accept
  further arguments, which will be passed on to the random number
  generating functions. Examples that can be provided here are `rpois`
  for Poisson distributed offspring, `rnbinom` for negative binomial
  offspring, or custom functions.

- ...:

  Parameters of the offspring distribution as required by R.

- stat_threshold:

  A stopping criterion for individual chain simulations; a positive
  number coercible to integer. When any chain's cumulative statistic
  reaches or surpasses `stat_threshold`, that chain ends. It also serves
  as a censoring limit so that results above the specified value, are
  set to `Inf`. Defaults to `Inf`.

- pop:

  Population size; An `<Integer>`. Used alongside `percent_immune` to
  define the susceptible population. Defaults to `Inf`.

- percent_immune:

  Percent of the population immune to infection at the start of the
  simulation; A `<numeric>` between 0 and 1. Used alongside `pop` to
  initialise the susceptible population. Defaults to 0.

## Value

An object of class `<epichains_summary>`, which is a numeric vector of
chain sizes or lengths with extra attributes for storing the simulation
parameters.

## `simulate_chain_stats()` vs [`simulate_chains()`](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epichains/dev/reference/simulate_chains.md)

`simulate_chain_stats()` is a time-invariant version of
[`simulate_chains()`](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epichains/dev/reference/simulate_chains.md).
In particular, it does not track the details of individual transmission
events but deals with eventual chain statistics, that is, the statistic
realised by a chain after dying out.

It is useful for generating a vector of chain sizes or lengths for a
given number of chains, if details of who infected whom and the timing
of infection are not of interest.

This function is used in `{epichains}` for calculating likelihoods in
the
[`likelihood()`](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epichains/dev/reference/likelihood.md)
function and for sampling from the borel distribution (See
?epichains::rborel). It is used extensively in the vignette on
[modelling disease
control](https://epiverse-trace.github.io/epichains/articles/interventions.html),
where only data on observed chain sizes and lengths are available.

## Definition of a transmission chain

A transmission chain as used here is an independent case and all the
secondary cases linked to it through transmission. The chain starts with
a single case, and each case in the chain generates secondary cases
according to the offspring distribution. The chain ends when no more
secondary cases are generated.

## Calculating chain sizes and lengths

The function simulates the chain size for chain \\i\\ at time \\t\\,
\\I\_{t, i}\\, as: \$\$I\_{t, i} = \sum\_{i}^{I\_{t-1}}X\_{t, i},\$\$
and the chain length/duration for chain \\i\\ at time \\t\\, \\L\_{t,
i}\\, as: \$\$L\_{t, i} = {\sf min}(1, X\_{t, i}), \$\$ where \\X\_{t,
i}\\ is the secondary cases generated by chain \\i\\ at time \\t\\, and
\\I\_{0, i} = L\_{0, i} = 1\\.

The distribution of secondary cases, \\X\_{t, i}\\ is modelled by the
offspring distribution (`offspring_dist`).

## References

Jacob C. (2010). Branching processes: their role in epidemiology.
International journal of environmental research and public health, 7(3),
1186–1204.
[doi:10.3390/ijerph7031204](https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph7031204)

Blumberg, S., and J. O. Lloyd-Smith. 2013. "Comparing Methods for
Estimating R0 from the Size Distribution of Subcritical Transmission
Chains." Epidemics 5 (3): 131–45.
[doi:10.1016/j.epidem.2013.05.002](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epidem.2013.05.002)
.

Farrington, C. P., M. N. Kanaan, and N. J. Gay. 2003. "Branching Process
Models for Surveillance of Infectious Diseases Controlled by Mass
Vaccination.” Biostatistics (Oxford, England) 4 (2): 279–95.
[doi:10.1093/biostatistics/4.2.279](https://doi.org/10.1093/biostatistics/4.2.279)
.

## Author

James M. Azam, Sebastian Funk

## Examples

``` r
# Simulate chain sizes with a poisson offspring distribution, assuming an
# infinite population and no immunity.
set.seed(32)
simulate_chain_stats(
  n_chains = 20,
  statistic = "size",
  offspring_dist = rpois,
  stat_threshold = 10,
  lambda = 0.9
)
#> `epichains_summary` object 
#> 
#>  [1]   6   7   5   7   1 Inf   3   4   6   1   9   1 Inf Inf   1   3 Inf Inf   2
#> [20]   5
#> 
#>  Simulated sizes: 
#> 
#> Max: >=10
#> Min: 1
# Simulate chain sizes with a negative binomial distribution and assuming
# a finite population and 10% immunity.
set.seed(32)
simulate_chain_stats(
  pop = 1000,
  percent_immune = 0.1,
  n_chains = 20,
  statistic = "size",
  offspring_dist = rnbinom,
  stat_threshold = 10,
  mu = 0.9,
  size = 0.36
)
#> `epichains_summary` object 
#> 
#>  [1] 1 1 1 2 2 4 2 1 1 4 1 1 2 1 1 2 1 1 1 1
#> 
#>  Simulated sizes: 
#> 
#> Max: 4
#> Min: 1
```
